# Josh Palay - Midterm report

When I signed up for this class, I was expecting it to be similar to many history classes I've taken. Granted, as a computer science concentrator, I haven't taken many history classes, but the few I have taken have been organized around the series of events that occurred an a particular chronological order. Each lecture, we would learn about ideas that arose in a specific period of time, how they related to earlier ideas, and how those ideas shaped and were shaped by society as a whole. Entering this class, I expected something similar - a chronology of technological and scientific breakthroughs along with their rippling social effects.

However, it quickly became clear that the history of medicine does not lend itself to this chronological style of study. On the very first day of class, we began our course by attempting as a class to define exactly what constitutes disease. Though we brainstormed many ideas, two main ideas stuck - a disease must consist of an abnormality, and this abnormality must be negative in some way. This definition was not scientifically precise; no medical test can definitively and objectively say what is or is not abnormal and negative. These words that define the field of medicine, and therefore our perceptions of our own bodies, are instead defined by our social contexts. Thus the history of medicine is best understood not as a chronology of ideas and their effects on society; to study the state of modern medicine in America is to examine the social contexts in which medicine has been practiced, giving us insight into why the medical field views some things as abnormal and why they chose to treat those abnormalities.

The way the course has been organized, with each lecture focusing on a field of medicine rather than a period of time, particularly lends itself to this way of understanding the history of medicine.  For example, when we discussed psychology, we discussed how rising awareness of the LGBTQ right movement caused psychologists to stop categorizing homosexuality as an abnormality to be corrected, and rather regard it as a part of the normal spectrum of human behavior.  Similarly, the more recent change of "Gender Identitiy Disorder" to "Gender Dysphoria" reflects cultural changes that have resulted from a better societal understanding of the experiences of transsexual individuals.  However, in our lecture on dissection, we discussed cultural forces that shaped who has been chosen for dissection over time, concentrating particularly on why bodies were often taken from certain populations without the original owners' consent. The cultural forces that affect the field of psychology are distinct from those that shape the practice of human dissection. By organizing the lectures by topic rather than chronological period, we were better able to examine the particular cultural forces that have shaped medicine over time.

Understanding the social structures that have shaped medicine, while interesting, is on its own not very useful for understanding the world we currently live in. The blog post assignments, however, have given me the opportunity to take the social structures we learned about and explore how they apply to today's world. For example, when we talked about how powerless populations had their cemetaries raided by bodysnatchers, I wondered if today's donation-driven system was any better. In researching [my blog post](http://joshshistoryofmedicine.tumblr.com/post/147109643100/commodification-of-cadavers), I learned of cadaver-procurement firms and their potential to commodify cadavers. As the commodification of body parts tends to affect the poor and the powerless, I learned how the concerns of the 19th century still apply today.

I came in to this course expecting to learn about the scientists that have driven medical progress, and then learn how those breakthroughs shaped the rest of society. Instead, I have learned that more frequently it is the other way around, that society's ideas of what is negative and what is abnormal actually shape how medicine is practiced. In writing blog posts, I have been better able to explore how these ideas still apply today, bringing meaning relevant to our modern world out of the history of how medicine evolved into its current form.
